book: demo-grammar
number: 1
title: Present continuous (I am doing)
page: 1
footer: Sample Grammar in Practice - Unit 1
---THEORY---
## A
Study this example situation:

~~~image right
Lena riding a bicycle through a sunny park path
~~~

Lena is on her bike. She is on her way to the lake.

> She's riding to the lake. (= She is riding ...)

This means: she is riding now, at the time of speaking. The action is not finished.

**am / is / are + -ing** is the present continuous:

| subject | be | verb |
| --- | --- |
| I | am (= I'm) | riding |
| he / she / it | is (= he's etc.) | working |
| we / you / they | are (= we're etc.) | doing |

## B
I am doing something = I started doing it and I haven't finished; I'm in the middle of doing it.

- Please don't make so much noise. I'm trying to study. (_not_ I try)
- 'Where's Nina?' 'She's making lunch.' (_not_ She makes lunch)
- Let's go out now. It isn't raining any more. (_not_ It doesn't rain)
- How's your new course? Are you enjoying it?
- What's all that noise? What's going on? or What's happening?

Sometimes the action is not happening at the time of speaking. For example:

Omar is talking to a friend on the phone. He says:

~~~image left
Omar talking on the phone while holding an open travel guide
~~~

~~~bubble
@Omar
I'm reading a travel guide at the moment. It's about Japan ...
~~~

Omar says "I'm reading ..." but he is not reading the guide at the time of speaking.
He means that he has started reading it, but has not finished it yet.
He is in the middle of reading it.

Some more examples:
- Mira wants to work in Spain, so she's learning Spanish.
- (but perhaps she isn't learning Spanish at the time of speaking)
- Some friends of mine are painting their own flat. They hope to finish it next month.

## C
You can use the present continuous with **today / this week / this year** etc. (periods around now):

- A: You're working hard today. (_not_ You work hard today)
- B: Yes, I have a lot to do.
- The shop I work for isn't doing so well this year.

## D
We use the present continuous when we talk about a **change** that has started to happen.
We often use these verbs in this way:

~~~bank
getting, becoming, changing, improving, starting, beginning, increasing, rising, falling, growing
~~~

- Is your English getting better? (_not_ Does your English get better)
- The number of cyclists is increasing very fast. (_not_ increases)
- At first I didn't like the course, but I'm starting to enjoy it now. (_not_ I start)
---EXERCISES---
## 1.1 -> A
What's happening in the pictures? Choose from these verbs:
~~~bank
cross, hide, scratch, take, tie, wave
~~~
~~~images
A woman lifting her phone to take a picture
A man bending down to tie a shoelace
A person crossing the road at a crosswalk
A man scratching his head
A person hiding behind a tree
A person waving to somebody in the distance
~~~
1. She's taking a picture.
2. He {{is tying|He's tying}} a shoelace.
3. {{He is crossing|He's crossing}} the road.
4. {{He is scratching|He's scratching}} his head.
5. {{He is hiding|He's hiding}} behind a tree.
6. {{He is waving|He's waving}} to somebody.

## 1.2 -> B
The sentences on the right follow those on the left. Which sentence goes with which?
~~~match
1. Please don't make so much noise. :: I'm trying to study.
2. We need to leave soon. :: It's getting late.
3. I don't have anywhere to live right now. :: I'm staying with friends.
4. I need to eat something soon. :: I'm getting hungry.
5. They don't need their car any more. :: They're trying to sell it.
6. Things are not so good at work. :: The company is losing money.
~~~

## 1.3 -> B, C
Put the verb into the correct form.
1. Please don't make so much noise. {{I'm trying|I am trying}} to study. _(I / try)_
2. Let's go out now. It {{isn't raining|is not raining}} any more. _(it / rain)_
3. You can turn off the radio. {{I'm not listening|I am not listening}} to it. _(I / listen)_
4. {{She's having|She is having}} a great time on holiday. _(she / have)_
5. {{He's learning|He is learning}} Spanish this year. _(he / learn)_
6. The weather {{is changing|it's changing}}. Look at those clouds. _(the weather / change)_

## 1.4 -> A, B
Find the present continuous forms in the text.
~~~highlight
Lena ==is riding== to the lake. Omar says he ==is reading== a travel guide, even though he ==is talking== on the phone right now. Mira ==is learning== Spanish because she wants to work in Spain.
~~~
